Docs: Add a router or multiplexer (#826)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/create-a-plugin/extend-a-plugin/add-router.md

---
id: add-router
title: Add a router or multiplexer to your plugin
description: Add a router or multiplexer to your plugin.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - router
  - multiplexer
---

> # Add a router or multiplexer to your plugin

Reviewer: This is specific for data source with backend. Becomes pretty long though

```suggestion
# Add a query router or multiplexer to your data source backend
```

Normally you implement the `QueryData` method in your backend plugin for data queries. But what if you need to support different kinds of queries: metrics, logs, and traces, for instance? That’s where the usage of a query _router_ (also known as a _multiplexer_) comes handy.

The plugin development requirement is that you need to populate the `queryType` property of your query model client-side, see the [`DataQuery`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/a728e9b4ddb6532b9fa2f916df106e792229e3e0/packages/grafana-data/src/types/query.ts#L47) interface.

With `queryType` populated in queries and sent to your backend plugin below is an example of how you would use the [`datasource.QueryTypeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/datasource#QueryTypeMux) to multiplex or route different query types to separate query handlers.

Implemented in this way, each query handler can then `json.Unmarshal` each query JSON field in [`DataQuery`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend#DataQuery) to a certain Go struct as shown in this example:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go
```

// All queries in backend.QueryDataRequest is guaranteed to only
// include queries with queryType "metrics".
func (d *MyDatasource) handleMetricsQuery(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
	// implementation...
}

// handleLogsQuery handle queries of query type "logs".
// All queries in backend.QueryDataRequest is guaranteed to only
// include queries with queryType "logs".
func (d *MyDatasource) handleLogsQuery(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
	// implementation...
}

// handleTracesQuery handle queries of query type "logs".
// All queries in backend.QueryDataRequest is guaranteed to only
// include queries with queryType "traces".
func (d *MyDatasource) handleTracesQuery(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
	// implementation...
}

// handleQueryFallback handle queries without a matching query type handler registered.
func (d *MyDatasource) handleQueryFallback(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
	// implementation...
}
```

## Advanced usage

> An example of using [`QueryTypeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/datasource#QueryTypeMux) can be found for Grafana's built-in Grafana Azure Monitor data source. Refer to this code for examples of implementation:

Reviewer: We don't cover this in https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples yet, but now we have the testdata datasource using it so linking to that.

```suggestion
An example of using [`QueryTypeMux`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/datasource#QueryTypeMux) can be found for Grafana's built-in TestData data source. Refer to this code for examples of implementation:
```

> - [grafana/azuremonitor.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L49) at 164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a - See the code at the [grafana/grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L49) repo.
> - [grafana/azuremonitor.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L182-L201) at 164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a - See the code at the [grafana/grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L182-L201) repo.
> - [grafana/azuremonitor.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L55-L57) at 164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a - See the code at the [grafana/grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/164ce63e280565cc960fb0e0d9f074ec003d5a2a/pkg/tsdb/azuremonitor/azuremonitor.go#L55-L57) repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [create query type multiplexer](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/623ee3a2be5c4cd84c61b6bbe82a32d18cc29828/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/testdata.go#L22) and [calls registerScenarios](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/623ee3a2be5c4cd84c61b6bbe82a32d18cc29828/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/testdata.go#L44)
- [registerScenarios method](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/623ee3a2be5c4cd84c61b6bbe82a32d18cc29828/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/scenarios.go#L33) uses a [helper method](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/623ee3a2be5c4cd84c61b6bbe82a32d18cc29828/pkg/tsdb/grafana-testdata-datasource/scenarios.go#L204-L207) to register each query type handler. The latter also shows how you can wrap the actual handler in another handler to apply common functionality/middleware to all handlers, e.g. logging and traces. 
```

Reviewer: @josmperez seems like you missed to incorporate this suggestion, but added my earlier suggestion?
